Good morning, everyone. It's great to be here. Thank you for inviting us to come along and talk
about City Rail Link project. My name is John Bridgman. I'm the chair of City Rail Link Ltd.
How are you? With me, I've got Pat, the CE. We're just going to run through quickly.
I've got a few introductory marks and paddle follow-up with a little bit more detail.
I've had leadership roles in the delivery of $15 billion worth of underground transport
infrastructure. I'm immensely proud of the work that our team have done since we last met
here to progress the project towards completion and public use.
It's a very exciting time for us at City Rail Link Ltd. We are only about 60 days
away from having the physical works complete and the final run-up to public use and the facility
being open. This is great news for Aucklanders and New Zealand as a whole. We can look forward
to the biggest transport transformation in Auckland since the Harbour Bridge.
For the benefit of those members of the committee who are new to City Rail Link Ltd, we were
established in 2010 and it's been our privilege to deliver the project for Auckland on behalf
of sponsors, Auckland Council and the New Zealand Government.
City Rail Link Ltd is a $5.5 billion, 3.45 kilometre underground railway that will
transform how Auckland moves and unlock more frequent, reliable and high-capacity rail
network in the city. By removing the central city termites at
White and Matar and adding two new through stations in the central city, City Rail Link
will make it far, far and easier for Aucklanders to access jobs, education, events and
reduce traffic congestion on the road network and support a more vibrant, productive
city centre and region. Once operational, trains will be running every four or five
minutes at peak times through the central city and the capacity to transport 19,000
45 minutes and I'll have the capacity to transport up to 19,000 passengers per hour
through the city central stations at opening. That capacity can grow to 36,000 per hour
over time and when we get 36,000 and when we get nine cars implemented across the
network it can grow to 54,000 passengers per hour at peak. The City Rail Link will
also transform the transport landscape in Auckland, supporting the city's
growing population and creating more places for people to live, work and play.
Very proud of having delivered on the sponsor's vision
contained within the project delivery agreement. This included an asset life of
100 years designed into the stations to provide safe, resilient, accessible and
high capacity rail system for all that can be something people are proud of
for years to come or decades to come. Planning and design that went into the
project in the early days has enabled City Rail Link Limited to deliver a
project that is world-class in design and distinctly New Zealand that
generations to come can be proud of. City Rail Link will enable, sorry City
Rail Link will challenge the notion that our infrastructure should only be
minimalist, minimalist and functional by being an asset that reflects an Auckland
that feels more like a grown-up city. Aucklanders will also benefit from
scope and design refinement that have happened along the way since such as
the decision in 2019 to increase the capacity of City Rail Link to allow nine
car trains rather than the six that were originally in position in the
business case. Extending the platforms at the three new stations and providing
the additional station entrance at Veriford Square is a future focused
decision that makes City Rail Link able to continue to deliver capacity as a
population continues to grow on the city. So we're grateful of the support and
advocacy as sponsors have provided throughout the life of the project.
Regular supporting, regular reporting to sponsors through our sponsors
representatives as well as monthly meetings with the mayor and minister has
ensured a productive relationship with a no surprises approach.
It's an exciting time for the project as I say is the majority of
physical construction works are now complete. We're now in testing and
commissioning phase and well advanced and all parties are working to
complete the project and compete, get people on the trains in the coming
months. Three new stations are finished and standing proudly in Auckland City
Centre. I think some of you are even going to go and have a look at them
tomorrow. And we remain on track to open the second in the second half of
this year. It's possibly the Aucklanders. It's the Aucklanders I think.
The rest of us. Move to Auckland. I might have to come up and say
look, carry on. So we're just months away from Aucklanders being able to
experience the benefits of CRL first hand.
And as you would expect at this time, we face a lot of questions
about exactly when will it open.
While that decision, sorry, you're going to spill the beans now.
While that decision sits, it's not my decision, unfortunately,
while that decision sits with sponsors and operators, we're confident
that the focus now is very much on getting to that finish line, having
a safe, reliable railway that's ready for passengers in the near term.
And we're looking forward to getting Aucklanders on board later this year.
The relationship we've had with our delivery partners, Link Alliance,
has been very good. It's been positive and constructive.
There's been no secret that and as many projects of the scale,
there's been normal commercial discussions underway with a for some time,
which are now on the final stages of being completed.
And we're confident to say that Link Alliance remains focused on achieving
its contractual completion obligations by the end of June,
or within a couple of days after, but more or less.
And the project remains on track for completion within the approved
funding envelope.
I'd just like to take the opportunity to acknowledge the extraordinary effort
that's gone into getting to the project to this point.
This has been a long, complex program delivered in the heart of the city.
Link Alliance and our other partners in Auckland Transport, Kiwi Rail,
Auckland One Rail and the early completion works contractors,
regulators and our emergency services have all done a sterling job to get here.
We shouldn't underestimate how complex this project is.
There are a few and I mean a handful in the region that are as large
and as complicated and as difficult as this project is to do it in Auckland
with a resource that's got no experience in projects of the scale.
This complexity is really outstanding.
And we've been studying the timelines, etc.
Everyone says this project is late.
Yes, we're not up to the projected timelines, but we're only six months
late in a nine year project.
So it's given the challenges we've had and we're inside the funding envelopes.
The changes in price have only been scoped to a large extent.
It's really an outstanding project.
The legacy of City Rail Link is not only that we see in the stations,
but also in the standard that we set and the way the infrastructure
has been delivered in New Zealand.
The benchmarks this project set in sustainability, social procurement,
health and safety and mana when our partnership is something the team
is immensely proud of and has been rewarded for with awards from various groups.
These out these outcomes matter because they endure beyond the opening date
of City Rail Link.
They live, they leave Auckland with critical infrastructure, transport infrastructure
and they've leave the sector stronger and more capable to deliver projects
like this in the future.
We have better skilled suppliers, more sustainable delivery practices
and we can carry these into the next generation of projects.
So Pat's going to touch on briefly a couple of just with respect,
how much time is great, but how much more time I've finished.
I was just going to say Pat, I was going to say because otherwise we won't
have much time for questions.
I don't know, we're happy to take questions.
I've given you a high level.
I think you've given us a high level.
Pat, is there anything you desperately need to say?
Sorry, I'm in a minute.
No, I think John's covered most of it.
I did want to point out that, you know, with our main contract to link lives,
but lots of other contractors working with us, but it's FinC,
Solntown, Fibachi, Downer, ACOM, Tonkin and Taylor, WSP, Oricon supporting us.
A lot of key parties made the success that we've had.
Very, very thankful for what we've achieved in the health and safety
areas that that is one of our key paramount focuses.
We've had a very strong health and safety record over a long period of time,
and that's all credit to the contractors that we've worked
and the high standards that they maintain over with the link
alliance contract alone, 24 million hours worked
and with a very strong health and safety performance.
So perhaps I could leave it there.
There'll be questions on the target hardship fund,
which has been also a critical part of the project and is now
now come to a close at the end of March and we're currently
in our what we call our trial operations and emergency response
testing phase. So we completed more recently the systems
integration, all the systems working together and now focused
on running the railway and the stations together,
working very closely with Auckland Transport, Auckland Rail and Kiwi Rail.
That started last week and we've also started our emergency
response testing first test was last week.
This will continue through through May and into early June.
So that's the key phase that we're in right now.
And if you come on site, you may come across one of these emergency
scenarios being being being worked on.
That's an example of fire on the train, fire on the tunnel.
There are various scenarios that we run through working very
closely with friends, police and St John's.
And those partners are really critical for us also.
So that's the stage right now.
And so still a lot of key testing to go through.
But we're in a very good place.
Very useful addition there.
I'm going to take you to Aucklanders first and then I'm going to go to
further south, so to speak.
Well, OK, you're tongue used to you as well.
Yeah, OK, right, OK, cool, right.
Hey, thanks, John and Patrick for your leadership
and to your team as well.
And that's been a massively complex project over many years.
So on behalf of Auckland, we're really excited about
finally being open.
John probably knows if my question is probably diving into the
when it's going to be open.
So, you know, you've mentioned 60 days from now,
the works completed, so it's 30 June.
Does that mean that in terms of the disruption around a CBD,
is that does that come to an end at 30 June?
It's it's ended already.
The disruption we've created has has been tidied up
for some months for any road cones and nothing to do with us.
OK, that's good to know.
The t-shirt that says that any road cones.
Not my road cones.
It's largely.
There were some precincts.
There were some precinct works around the stations.
Those were undertaken by by Auckland Transport.
They've been completed also.
We've had some openings, opening ceremonies and blessings
around the precinct surrounding the three stations most.
One of the one of the more recent ones was the Watamata Station
Plaza that was opened up.
And you might recall the glasswork just being cleaned
and hasn't been cleaned for about 10 years.
But we know to open that up and similarly at the other stations.
But that those are open now and available to the public
where possible.
We've pulled back fences and tried to give the public
as much space as possible.
And in terms of open for the public,
are you targeting particular month or particular quarter of the year?
You're trying, aren't you?
It's really not our call.
There's a there's quite a number of steps that 18 need to go through.
Both internally and externally.
There's a process for trying to land those issues
that's current at the moment and.
It's imminent.
So that's the last question on timing.
OK, and then finally,
just reflecting on the project.
I mean, you know, looking back,
reflections on key learnings for the project.
You know, we've delivered it within the funding envelope,
but it had to be increased.
But any takeaways on key learnings throughout how to execute this?
We're planning to undertake a lessons learned
study that will be done within within this year.
We're underway scoping that out
and have discussed it with the sponsors, in terms of that.
So that'll cover a wide range of project activities
so that we can take lessons,
they're all lessons learned in projects
and that will benefit future infrastructure projects in New Zealand.
So at a high level, were you, you know,
any that you can allude to for the committee?
I think the critical ones are trying to define the scope appropriately.
Or how a project like this fits within a programme of work
that's because the scope was increased significantly
after we started, and that's always been hard
for people to get their heads around.
And there's still questions about some of the follow on work
that's necessary in terms of level crossings
and other network improvements
to be able to achieve the capacity the project offers.
So that idea of how a project
that fits within a programme is really important
to an understanding what that programme means over time.
So stakeholders, particularly sponsors and owners
can understand what that looks like in the form of time.
The other thing, the other big lesson I think
is the joint venture between the Crown and Council,
in this instance, has been really helpful.
The buy-in and accountability arrangements
that delivers is very powerful for the project
and supports the project very well.
And so it's a model, I think, that's valuable.
If you look at major projects around the world,
they would say getting local authority
buy-in to a big project like this,
if it's centrally funded, it is fundamental to success.
And the joint venture has done that very well.
And so I think that's...
I'm just going to keep on going around.
I'll call us then Stevie then Son.
So for me, those are the two very big issues
that come out, Stevie Ramon.
Thank you. Very technical question.
How many total tests won't be incomplete so far?
And what is the issues or risk being identified
during the testing?
Well, I think through the systems testing
with over 16,000 tests,
it's probably a bit higher than that now,
and we're a few.
We're probably about 99% through those tests.
I think that we haven't had any,
what I would call fatal flaws through the testing.
We've had issues.
We'll always have issues.
You have some tests that fail,
and you have to go back and do the retest
until you succeed.
That just takes time.
We haven't had anything, though,
that's been a major impact on program, for example.
It is just getting through the volume.
You need a little bit of luck along the journey as well
with the testing, but overall,
it's gone very well.
So that means the system haven't been tested
under different scenarios,
including disruption or crisis situation,
or how the system is being performed in those situations?
That's sort of what we're doing now.
The trial operations, there are a number of tests
that were undertaken right at this moment
again through to June.
That's including, for example,
if there was a power failure or infrastructure issue
with the stations or the rail network,
and then the emergency response testing
such as a fire in the train.
So those tests started at the beginning of actually last week,
and we'll continue through the first week of June.
Beyond that, Auckland Transport and Auckland One Rail
as the rail operator,
we'll continue just to keep running the trains,
keep getting familiar with the asset and the systems,
and just ensuring that they're very comfortable
to be able to open the railway in a safe and reliable manner.
So you also mentioned in your opening remarks
that you have been tested for integration
with the existing rail network.
Is it including other passenger and freight services,
or is it including all the P.R.s as well?
Oh, there's the whole network timetable,
but I think when we talk about that systems integration,
it's integration with the existing system
that Auckland Transport have
and the system that,
and the new systems that we're providing.
So it's integrating them.
If you take Waitemata station, for example,
existing station,
it's our systems integrating with the existing system
at Waitemata.
We are fortunate that Honeywell are a key systems
provided to Auckland Transport already.
They're also assisting us with our station systems,
which does facilitate that connectivity.
And also covers the wider rail network system.
So signalling communications, train monitoring, et cetera.
Just the last question.
On time performance against the Panned Town Table.
How does it look like during the testing?
The timetable testing's gone.
On time performance.
Yes, it's gone well.
We had timetable testing in January this year,
and then most recently,
the week of April 13th to 15th,
that timetable testing's led by
Auckland Transport, Auckland Rail and Kiwiro.
But the last testing that we did in April was successful.
And that's based on a certain number of trains per hour.
That's running a greater number of trains on the network.
And that testing has gone well.
I think it leads into confidence around the timetable
when we eventually open.
Excellent. Thank you.
Celia. Thank you.
Very interesting.
I did want to ask about the Targeted Hardship Fund.
This is a much smaller project.
It's often asked for.
We don't always do it.
That 12 million, was that 50-50 from the council
and from government? Yes.
OK. And has it all been spent?
It was spent 10.7 million out of 12.
OK.
With the funds... So the most goes back to...
Goes back to when the fund was established in 2021.
And it's supported 72 businesses over that time.
Great. And did you have...
Obviously, you've got criteria for that.
Was there anything that you would change about the criteria?
Or worked pretty well?
I think overall it served its purpose
and we're proud of how we managed that fund.
It was a difficult time for businesses
because it wasn't just the disruption caused by the project.
As you know, we had COVID
and then we had the economic challenges the country had.
So it's been sympathetic to the businesses.
It's been a difficult journey for them.
But I think that the Targeted Hardship Fund
was critical. Great.
Really important element and something that we would encourage
for other projects,
particularly if you're having to do a project in the middle
of a central business district.
It's not easy for businesses.
So we part of our lessons learned
with what we do later in the year.
The take-off... We'll have to see that.
At some point, I had a couple more questions.
You know, I was born in London,
so I grew up using the Tube and the difference
between the old, old stations and some of the new ones,
like the Jubilee line and the Queen Elizabeth line,
just startling.
And so I'm quite excited to come to Auckland at some point.
But we've talked about the connection with other trends.
Could you clarify, for example, if I do want to come up,
I'd like to know where the Northern Explorer's
now going to come to?
Is that been...?
That's something I'm not sure.
You need to ask Kiwi Rail like that.
I think there's a...
Just clarify,
City Rail Link is a connection within the Auckland Rail network.
So the existing metro trains that they have in Auckland
will continue.
They just run differently.
So there's a different timetable
and a different configuration of the way the trains all run.
So it means something.
Yeah, they just use the infrastructure
to be able to get better use out of the existing network.
The other trains that run around the country
won't get as far as City Rail Link.
It's a facility.
It's a link within the Auckland Metro train network.
Hopefully we'll be able to connect.
We're more question-close.
OK, and the last one was,
do you think this network is like future-proofed
for the next 30 years
that you don't see those,
oh, I wish we'd also added on this,
or gone further or put another station?
Is there any thought that he's going to need any expansion?
Sorry, I didn't quite finish this one, but, you know...
No, no, there isn't really room to put in another station.
They're quite close together, as it is.
Yeah.
The future-proof pieces that have been added
Beresford Entrance was a big addition,
and that's quite a critical piece.
The major bit was putting in the capacity for nine cars,
and that will stand a much greater test of time
than what the six-car capacity would?
Go on.
Thank you.
Well, actually, thank you.
My questions are around the capacity
and the peak passenger capacity.
You've talked 19,000 passengers per hour at opening,
growing to 36 per hour over time,
and then 54,000 to the nine-car.
So can you just explain the sort of timeframe,
scope, and opportunities of when that is likely to kick in
in terms of hitting the nine-car metric?
The nine-car thing...
Well, I think the forecasts sort of talk about 2040
for six-car capacity in that sort of timeframe.
Now, those depend very much on what point in time you start.
Some... When there was a higher passenger transport use
just prior to COVID, people were saying,
well, that might be a hitter bit earlier.
If you go back a little bit earlier in time,
then they would say that peak may be later.
So trying to project what that forward growth is going to be
is quite tricky.
The 54,000 is...
You have to put in nine-car capacity across the network.
So before you can hit that sort of volume,
and that's quite an investment.
But you don't have to go digging up Auckland to do it
when you do do it
because that investment has been made now.
Well, on opening will be the car capacity?
19,000.
And how many cars?
Oh, six.
Well, Auckland Network only has six car capacity at the moment.
Yeah.
Yeah, that was all right.
That'll be platform-based, won't it?
Yes.
So just interested as to how the relationship
and performance issues that were experienced
with the operators of the system,
with Q-Rail and AT,
if you're on a project you've been resolved,
and are you comfortable with
that they're going to be in a position to take over
the assets that you've built?
Yes, yes.
Yeah, we've worked very closely with them
since the inception of the relations restaurant.
We established what we called,
I was going to touch on earlier, one client alliance
which essentially ourselves, Q-Rail, AT,
and Auckland Runt together, working together.
We called again, it's an informal alliance,
but we called the one client, so we speak with one voice,
to improve collaboration and the way we interact
with the alliance, the client's contractor.
And I think generally that's gone really well.
The collaboration between all the parties
has been really positive and strong.
Okay.
An earlier lessons, LUD report,
carried out by Infrastructure Commission,
found that there were some gaps,
and it wasn't as strong as it could have been earlier on
on the project lifecycle.
So are you saying that there's been significant
or resolution of some of those issues that were identified?
Yes.
And as Pat said, one client alliance was a major part
in doing that.
It addressed a whole series of some of those issues,
the governance gaps,
but also supported the project,
particularly in the system space,
to overcome the need for each of the entities
to have their own advice in that area.
The systems piece was able to be dealt with
at a project level much more effectively.
And that's all to do with integration
and how the project at the end of the day works.
Kiwi Rail are effectively running the network,
the tunnels now,
and the rail part of the project.
Whilst the asset hasn't been handed over to them,
they control it at the stage,
and that's working seamlessly.
There's about 18,000 trips
through the tunnel so far of trains.
Okay.
Fascinating.
So just in terms of the lessons learned,
wrap up what you're planning to do.
Will you be involving Infrastructure Commission in that,
given that they've already done Report 1 and Report 2?
We haven't chosen a party to undertake the report yet.
We're in the process of trying to select someone
to help us with that,
but obviously having someone with rail experience,
but we're just going through that process right now
to select a party to work with us.
And we'll obviously be very happy
to coordinate with the Infrastructure Commission.
We want to build on those studies that have been done before.
Yeah, I think that's really important,
because given all the challenges the project had,
including COVID shutdowns and changes in scope,
being able to bring it in within the budget on budget,
relatively on time,
it's a wonderful achievement if that's what's delivered.
I think it'd be incredibly helpful for the rest of the public sector
delivering infrastructure to get those insights
and to be able to have that shared.
That's definitely the plan to share those insights externally.
Absolutely.
Good.
A couple of quick questions from me.
First one, just the net work integration.
We're all familiar with the issue that there's a whole bunch of crossings
that need road crossings that need to be addressed one way or the other.
It's going to take quite a while to roll that out.
Can you just talk to us just generally about how the CRL integrates
and how really, we know the KiwiR has been doing lots of hard thing
up the tracks and so on and doing that sort of work,
but how really the system is to cope with that level of growth.
We've gone from the, you know, we've got the 54,000 passengers,
except for if we get to that sort of stage,
the system is a whole being able to deal with that sort of growth.
Or is that just something that's sort of beyond your...
That's really...
I think you'd need to address that more with KiwiR.
Obviously, there are some very big changes that need to happen
around level crossings, stations across the network,
worry other bottlenecks that exist.
And that investment is predicated,
but you're talking quite a period of time before you want to make that.
But to maximise the benefit from CRL,
there are some other changes which are required.
If you want to get to that level, is there that level of demand?
That's a different matter.
Yeah, and that sort of...
So you've got a chicken and egg.
The point is that a decision was made in 2018, really,
in 2018 that we don't want to go back
and have to retrofit those stations.
No, basically, please.
Along with the provision for platforms,
platform screen doors which enable driverless trains,
you can't get to driverless trains without that,
and it would be difficult to put that in later.
That's good. And that's a scope change as well.
Yes. So there are a number of scope changes.
The platform length, the bearers for entrance, and that.
Platform screen doors and some other connection issues around Britomart.
So because the budget for the project was increased at one point,
is that a reasonable reflection of the increases in the scope?
Yes. Yes.
So we want it more, we paid for more, we got more.
I mean, we put the structure in place for a platform,
for the platform screen doors, obviously,
and the structure's there to avoid disruption further down the track
of whether it had been major disruption
and if it closed the restations.
It's not easy to do when it's closed.
If you go back to the original business case,
it was 2.5 billion in 2015.
There's been 1.6 billion worth of scope changes,
whether it be Bearers Street, platform screen doors,
all those sort of things that we've talked about today.
1.6 billion.
There's about 700 million in cost of a year's delay on COVID.
And a couple of 100 million or 300 million on increased risk
and completely against what was understood at that original
business case and some property and corporate cost issues
that are about 400 million.
And that's due to the 5.5 that we're currently in.
It's good to have that break, Daniel. Thank you.
And the other question was just about the staff,
the contractors have worked on the project.
And one of the things we talked about a lot is pipeline.
And we know that one element then there was some coverage of that
about tunnelers and we said, OK, we've done our tunneling.
Brilliant.
And now there are no more tunneling jobs in New Zealand,
so we're off somewhere else.
That happens.
But just generally, I mean, it's a big project.
How is that?
And you've got the other big project in Auckland,
which is the airport.
And just how is the workforce?
What are you seeing of the workforce flowing through
into other projects and just how that's been managed?
I can possibly, I mean, we're based in the same building
as the contractors, so we see the comings and goings.
Obviously, there's a lot of demobilisation of staff
from the contractor side.
The Australian market's pretty active.
That's still very busy from an infrastructure perspective.
So opportunities will be there.
I know a lot of companies will be looking at the PPP up north
and opportunities have come out of that selection process.
And so that will create...
Yes, that will create opportunities.
But naturally, as you've got international companies,
they have to go to where the workers.
And if they're specialist workers,
they will often have to repatriate or show or go back.
I do know from interacting with these workers on a daily basis
that they've loved working here.
I've really enjoyed New Zealand and working on the project.
But unfortunately, we will see a lot of them leave
because of their specialist skills.
And as you mentioned, Andy, the tunnelers, for example,
that was some time ago.
OK, that's very helpful.
I think we are at time very much.
Really appreciate it.
I hope you enjoyed taking some of our Auckland colleagues around.
Unfortunately, I've got a board meeting tomorrow.
Oh, well, you know, but if there's a possibility
of the rest of us being organised, could we...
No, that's always possible.
I think he said Aucklandised.
LAUGHTER
I think I said Auckland guys, I think.
Anyway, would you like to do that, colleagues?
The offer is always there.
OK, I think we will arrange it.
OK, yeah, sounds good.
Thank you.
Really appreciate it.
Thank you. Go well with the rest of the project.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thanks for your support.